Add blog post: From Aligned to Unaligned Checkpoints - Part 1: Checkpoints, Alignment, and Backpressure (#387)
apache/flink-web: _posts/2020-10-13-from-aligned-to-unaligned-checkpoints-part-1.md

---
layout: post 
title: "From Aligned to Unaligned Checkpoints - Part 1: Checkpoints, Alignment, and Backpressure" 

> date: 2020-10-13T03:00:00.000Z

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2020-10-15T03:00:00.000Z
```

Reviewer: If not to be published today, please update accordingly when merging (_ideally_, also the file name and such).

authors:
- Arvid Heise:
  name: "Arvid Heise"
- Stephan Ewen:
  name: "Stephan Ewen"
excerpt: Apache Flink’s checkpoint-based fault tolerance mechanism is one of its defining features. Because of that design, Flink unifies batch and stream processing, can easily scale to both very small and extremely large scenarios and provides support for many operational features. In this post we recap the original checkpointing process in Flink, its core properties and issues under backpressure.
---

Apache Flink’s checkpoint-based fault tolerance mechanism is one of its defining features. Because of that design, Flink unifies batch and stream processing, can easily scale to both [very small](https://hal.inria.fr/hal-02463206/document) and [extremely large](https://102.alibaba.com/detail?id=35) scenarios and provides support for many operational features like stateful upgrades with [state evolution](https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-docs-stable/dev/stream/state/schema_evolution.html) or [roll-backs and time-travel](https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-docs-stable/ops/state/savepoints.html). 

> Despite all these great properties, Flink's checkpointing method has an Achilles Heel: the speed of a completed checkpoint is determined by the speed at which data flows through the application. When the application backpressures, the processing of checkpoints is backpressured as well (Appendix 1 recaps what is backpressure and why it can be a good thing). In such cases, checkpoints may take longer to complete or even time out completely.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Despite all these great properties, Flink's checkpointing method has an Achilles Heel: the speed of a completed checkpoint is determined by the speed at which data flows through the application. When the application backpressures, the processing of checkpoints is backpressured as well ([Appendix 1](#appendix-1---on-backpressure) recaps what is backpressure and why it can be a good thing). In such cases, checkpoints may take longer to complete or even time out completely.
```

In Flink 1.11, the community introduced a first version of a new feature called "[unaligned checkpoints](https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-docs-stable/ops/state/checkpoints.html#unaligned-checkpoints)" that aims at solving this issue, while Flink 1.12 plans to further expand its functionality. In this two-series blog post, we discuss how Flink’s checkpointing mechanism has been modified to support unaligned checkpoints, how unaligned checkpoints work, and how this new mode impacts Flink users. In the first of the two posts, we start with a recap of the original checkpointing process in Flink, its core properties and issues under backpressure.

> ## State in Streaming Applications

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# State in Streaming Applications
```

> Simply put, State is the information that you need to remember across events. Even the most trivial streaming applications are typically stateful because of their need to “remember” the exact position they are processing data from, in the form of a Kafka Partition Offset or a File Offset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Simply put, state is the information that you need to remember across events. Even the most trivial streaming applications are typically stateful because of their need to “remember” the exact position they are processing data from, for example in the form of a Kafka Partition Offset or a File Offset.
```

Reviewer: Think it's important to not phrase it like it's "either or" when mentioning offsets here, since it could also be something different e.g. if we think about some other connectors like Pulsar (`messageID`). Some users tend to be confused and think that Flink is bound to Kafka, so I'd add "for example" just to be safe.

Author: Yes, good point. From academics perspective "or" is always inclusive, but on a more informal article, I guess it makes sense to more follow the verbal "or", which has a high chance of being exclusive.

In addition, many applications hold state internally as a way to support their internal operations, such as windows, aggregations, joins, or state machines.

> For the remainder of this article, we use the following example showing a streaming application consisting of four operators, each one holding some state

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the remainder of this article, we'll use the following example showing a streaming application consisting of **four operators**, each one holding some state.
```

<span>
	<center>
	<img vspace="8" style="width:75%" src="{{site.baseurl}}/img/blog/2020-10-13-from-aligned-to-unaligned-checkpoints-part-1/from-aligned-to-unaligned-checkpoints-part-1-imge-1.png" />
	</center>
</span>

## State Persistence through Checkpoints

> Streaming applications are long-lived. They inevitably experience hardware and software failures but should, ideally, look from the outside as if no failure ever happened. Since applications are long-lived — and can potentially accumulate very large state —, recomputing partial results after failures can take quite some time and thus a way to persist and recover the (potentially very large) application state is necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Streaming applications are long-lived. They inevitably experience hardware and software failures but should, ideally, look from the outside as if no failure ever happened. Since applications are long-lived — and can potentially accumulate very large state —, recomputing partial results after failures can take quite some time, and so a way to persist and recover this (potentially very large) application state is necessary.
```

Reviewer: Cutting a bit on the formalities here, for readability.

> Flink relies on its state checkpointing and recovery mechanism to implement such behavior, as shown in the figure below. Periodic checkpoints store a snapshot of the application’s state on some Checkpoint Storage (commonly an Object Store or Distributed File System, like S3, HDFS, GCS, Azure Blob Storage, etc.). When a failure is detected, the affected parts of the application are reset to the state of the latest checkpoint (either by a local reset or by loading the state from the checkpoint storage).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Flink relies on its **state checkpointing and recovery mechanism** to implement such behavior, as shown in the figure below. Periodic checkpoints store a snapshot of the application’s state on some Checkpoint Storage (commonly an Object Store or Distributed File System, like S3, HDFS, GCS, Azure Blob Storage, etc.). When a failure is detected, the affected parts of the application are reset to the state of the latest checkpoint (either by a local reset or by loading the state from the checkpoint storage).
```

Reviewer: Too much text with no styling, introducing some **bold** here and there to ease that.

> <span>
> 	<center>
> 	<img vspace="8" style="width:100%" src="{{site.baseurl}}/img/blog/2020-10-13-from-aligned-to-unaligned-checkpoints-part-1/from-aligned-to-unaligned-checkpoints-part-1-imge-2.png" />
> 	</center>
> </span>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<div style="line-height:40%;">
    <br>
</div>

<center>
	<img vspace="8" style="width:90%" src="{{site.baseurl}}/img/blog/2020-10-13-from-aligned-to-unaligned-checkpoints-part-1/from-aligned-to-unaligned-checkpoints-part-1-imge-2.png" />
</center>

<div style="line-height:60%;">
    <br>
</div>
```

> Flink’s checkpoint-based approach differs from the approach taken by other stream processing systems, for example keeping state in a distributed database, or writing state changes to a log. The checkpoint-based approach has some nice properties, described below, which make it a great option for Apache Flink.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Flink’s checkpoint-based approach differs from the approach taken by other stream processing systems that keep state in a distributed database or write state changes to a log, for example. The checkpoint-based approach has some nice properties, described below, which make it a great option for Flink.
```

> - **Checkpointing has very simple external dependencies**: An Object Storage or Distributed FileSystem are probably the most available and easiest-to-administer services. Because they are available on all public cloud providers and among the first systems to provide on-premises, Flink becomes a well suited system for a “Cloud Native” stack. Moreover, these storage systems are cheaper by an order of magnitude (GB/month) when compared to distributed databases, key/value stores, or event brokers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Checkpointing has very simple external dependencies**: An _Object Storage_ or a _Distributed FileSystem_ are probably the most available and easiest-to-administer services. Because these are available on all public cloud providers and among the first systems to provide on-premises, Flink becomes well-suited for a _cloud-native_ stack. In addition, these storage systems are cheaper by an order of magnitude (GB/month) when compared to distributed databases, key/value stores, or event brokers.
```

> - **Checkpoints are immutable and versioned**: Together with immutable and versioned inputs (input streams are both immutable and version, by nature), they support storing immutable application snapshots that can be used for rollbacks, debugging, testing, or as a cheap alternative to analyze application state outside the production setup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Checkpoints are immutable and versioned**: Together with immutable and versioned inputs (as input streams are, by nature), checkpoints support storing immutable application snapshots that can be used for rollbacks, debugging, testing, or as a cheap alternative to analyze application state outside the production setup.
```

> - **Checkpoints decouple the “stream transport” from the persistence mechanism**: “Stream transport” refers to how data is being exchanged between operators, for example during a shuffle. That is key to Flink’s batch <-> streaming unification in one system because it allows Flink to implement a data transport that can take the shape of both a low-latency streaming exchange or a decoupled batch data exchange.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Checkpoints decouple the “stream transport” from the persistence mechanism**: “Stream transport” refers to how data is being exchanged between operators (e.g. during a shuffle). This decoupling is key to Flink’s batch <-> streaming unification in one system, because it allows Flink to implement a data transport that can take the shape of both a low-latency streaming exchange or a decoupled batch data exchange.
```

> ## The Checkpointing Procedure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# The Checkpointing Mechanism
```

Reviewer: More common/indexed term.

> The fundamental challenge solved by the checkpointing algorithm (details in [this paper](https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/6fa0/917417d3c213b0e130ae01b7b440b1868dde.pdf)) is drawing a snapshot out of the ever-changing state of a streaming application without suspending the continuous processing of events. Because there are always events in-flight (on the network, in I/O buffers, etc.), up- and downstream operators can be processing events from different times: the sink may write data from 11:04, while the source already ingests events from 11:06. Ideally, all snapshotted data should belong to the same point-in-time, as if the input was paused and we waited until all in-flight data was drained (the pipeline becoming idle) before taking the snapshot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The fundamental challenge solved by the checkpointing algorithm (details in [this paper](https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/6fa0/917417d3c213b0e130ae01b7b440b1868dde.pdf)) is drawing a snapshot out of the ever-changing state of a streaming application without suspending the continuous processing of events. Because there are always events in-flight (on the network, in I/O buffers, etc.), up- and downstream operators can be processing events from different times: the sink may write data from 11:04, while the source already ingests events from 11:06. Ideally, all snapshotted data should belong to the same point-in-time, as if the input was paused and we waited until all in-flight data was drained (i.e. the pipeline becoming idle) before taking the snapshot.
```

## Consistency Guarantees

The alignment phase is only necessary for checkpoints with __exactly-once__ processing semantics, which is the default setting in Flink. If an application runs with __at-least-once__ processing semantics, checkpoints will not block any channels with barriers during alignment, which has an additional cost from the duplication of the then-not-blocked events when recovering the operator.

This is not to be confused with having at-least-once semantics only in the sinks — something that many Flink users choose over transactional sinks — because many sink operations are idempotent or converge to the same result (like inputs/outputs to key/value stores). Having at-least-once semantics in an intermediate operator state is often not idempotent (for example a simple count aggregation) and hence using exactly-once checkpoints is advisable for the majority of Flink users.

> ## Conclusion

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Conclusion
```

> This blog post recaps how Flink’s fault tolerance mechanism (based on aligned checkpoints) works, and why checkpointing is a great mechanism for a fault-tolerant stream processor. The checkpointing mechanism has been optimized over time to make checkpoints faster and cheaper (with both asynchronous and incremental checkpoints) and faster-to-recover (local caching), but the basic concepts (barriers, alignment, operator state snapshots) are still the same as in the original version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This blog post recaps how Flink’s fault tolerance mechanism (based on aligned checkpoints) works, and why checkpointing is a fitting mechanism for a fault-tolerant stream processor. The checkpointing mechanism has been optimized over time to make checkpoints faster and cheaper (with both asynchronous and incremental checkpoints) and faster-to-recover (local caching), but the basic concepts (barriers, alignment, operator state snapshots) are still the same as in the original version.
```

Reviewer: Personal suggestion, "great" makes me instantly roll my eyes and think "Marketing".

> The next part will dig into a major break with the original mechanism, namely circumventing the alignment phase — hence the name unaligned checkpoints. Stay tuned for the second part, which explains how unaligned checkpoints work and how they guarantee consistent checkpoint times under backpressure.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The next part will dig into a major break with the original mechanism that avoids the alignment phase — the recently-introduced "unaligned checkpoints". Stay tuned for the second part, which explains how unaligned checkpoints work and how they guarantee consistent checkpointing times under backpressure.  
```

Reviewer: Waaaaay too complex vocabulary. Remember that not everyone reading this will have the same level of english proficiency.

> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

<hr>

```

## Appendix 1 - On Backpressure

Backpressure refers to the behavior where a slow receiver (e.g. of data/requests) makes the senders slow down in order to not overwhelm the receiver, something that can result in possibly dropping some of the processed data or requests. This is a crucial and very much desirable behavior for systems where completeness/correctness is important. Backpressure is implicitly implemented in many of the most basic building blocks of distributed communication, such as TCP Flow Control, bounded (blocking) I/O queues, poll-based consumers, etc.

> Apache Flink implements back-pressure across the entire data flow graph. A sink that (temporarily) cannot keep up with the data rate will result in the source connectors slowing down and pulling data out of the source systems more slowly. We believe that this is a good and desirable behavior, because backpressure is not only necessary in order to avoid overwhelming the memory of a receiver (thread), but can also prevent different stages of the streaming application from drifting apart too far.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apache Flink implements backpressure across the entire data flow graph. A sink that (temporarily) cannot keep up with the data rate will result in the source connectors slowing down and pulling data out of the source systems more slowly. We believe that this is a good and desirable behavior, because backpressure is not only necessary in order to avoid overwhelming the memory of a receiver (thread), but can also prevent different stages of the streaming application from drifting apart too far.
```

Consider the example below:
- We have a source (let’s say reading data from Apache Kafka), parsing data, grouping and aggregating data by a key, and writing it to a sink system (some database).
- The application needs to re-group data by key between the parsing and the grouping/aggregation step.

<span>
	<center>
	<img vspace="8" style="width:75%" src="{{site.baseurl}}/img/blog/2020-10-13-from-aligned-to-unaligned-checkpoints-part-1/from-aligned-to-unaligned-checkpoints-part-1-imge-5.png" />
	</center>
</span>

> Let’s assume we use a __non-backpressure approach__, like writing the data to a log/MQ for the data re-grouping over the network (cf. [Kafka Streams](https://docs.confluent.io/current/streams/architecture.html#backpressure)). If the sink is now slower than the remaining parts of the streaming application (which can easily happen), the first stage (source and parse) will still work as fast as possible to pull data out of the source, parse it, and put it into the log for the shuffle. That intermediate log will accumulate a lot of data, meaning it needs significant capacity, so that in a worst case scenario can hold a full copy of the input data or otherwise result in data loss (when the drift is greater than the retention time).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let’s assume we use a __non-backpressure approach__, like writing the data to a log/MQ for the data re-grouping over the network (the approach used by [Kafka Streams](https://docs.confluent.io/current/streams/architecture.html#backpressure)). If the sink is now slower than the remaining parts of the streaming application (which can easily happen), the first stage (source and parse) will still work as fast as possible to pull data out of the source, parse it, and put it into the log for the shuffle. That intermediate log will accumulate a lot of data, meaning it needs significant capacity, so that in a worst case scenario can hold a full copy of the input data or otherwise result in data loss (when the drift is greater than the retention time).
```

Reviewer: Had to look up what cf. means, it's not as commonly used as _i.e._ or _e.g._.
